AWS OTel Collector installation instructions (#741)
akka/akka-platform-guide: docs-source/docs/modules/telemetry/pages/aws-xray-support.adoc

= AWS X-Ray Tracing support
:page-toclevels: 3

include::ROOT:partial$include.adoc[]

Lightbend Telemetry 2.16.1+ can report traces to https://aws.amazon.com/xray/[AWS X-Ray {tab-icon}, window="tab"] using the https://aws-otel.github.io/[AWS Distro {tab-icon}, window="tab"] and the {cinnamon-docs}/extensions/opentracing/zipkin.html[Zipkin reporter {tab-icon}, window="tab"].

Note that Lightbend Telemetry doesn't send traces directly to AWS X-Ray. You will need to set up the https://github.com/aws-observability/aws-otel-Collector[AWS OTel Collector {tab-icon}, window="tab"] within your EKS cluster. Lightbend Telemetry uses Zipkin protocol to send traces to the AWS OTel Collector which batches them and then pushes them to the AWS X-Ray backend.

> First, you will need to install the AWS OTel Collector into your EKS cluster. We provide a Pulumi script that automates EKS cluster and Akka Operator setup. It also has an option to install the AWS OTel Collector. Please follow instructions on the xref:deployment:aws-install-quickstart.adoc#install-aws-otel-collector[AWS OTel Collector] page.

Reviewer: Let's also add another paragraph linking to this page: https://aws-otel.github.io/docs/getting-started/collector

In case people are not using Pulumi.

Author: That's a good idea. I will add a link here and on the `telemetry:aws-xray-support.adoc` page.

= AWS X-Ray Tracing support
:page-toclevels: 3

include::ROOT:partial$include.adoc[]

Lightbend Telemetry 2.16.1+ can report traces to https://aws.amazon.com/xray/[AWS X-Ray {tab-icon}, window="tab"] using the https://aws-otel.github.io/[AWS Distro {tab-icon}, window="tab"] and the {cinnamon-docs}/extensions/opentracing/zipkin.html[Zipkin reporter {tab-icon}, window="tab"].

> Note that Lightbend Telemetry doesn't send traces directly to AWS X-Ray. You will need to set up the https://github.com/aws-observability/aws-otel-Collector[AWS OTel Collector {tab-icon}, window="tab"] within your EKS cluster. Lightbend Telemetry uses Zipkin protocol to send traces to the AWS OTel Collector that batches and pushes them to the AWS X-Ray backend.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that Lightbend Telemetry doesn't send traces directly to AWS X-Ray. You will need to set up the https://github.com/aws-observability/aws-otel-Collector[AWS OTel Collector {tab-icon}, window="tab"] within your EKS cluster. Lightbend Telemetry uses Zipkin protocol to send traces to the AWS OTel Collector which batches them and then pushes them to the AWS X-Ray backend.
```

> First, you will need to install AWS OTel Collector into your EKS cluster. We provide a Pulumi script that automates EKS cluster and Akka Operator setup. It also has an option to install AWS OTel Collector. Please follow instructions on the xref:deployment:aws-install-quickstart.adoc#install-aws-otel-collector[AWS OTel Collector] page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, you will need to install the AWS OTel Collector into your EKS cluster. We provide a Pulumi script that automates EKS cluster and Akka Operator setup. It also has an option to install the AWS OTel Collector. Please follow instructions on the xref:deployment:aws-install-quickstart.adoc#install-aws-otel-collector[AWS OTel Collector] page.
```

Once you have the AWS OTel Collector deployed you will need to configure your application.

> In order to enable your application to produce traces, you will need to set up Cinnamon agent as described on the {cinnamon-docs}/getting-started/start.html[Lightbend Telemetry Getting started {tab-icon}, window="tab"] page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable your application for trace production, you will need to set up the Cinnamon agent as described on the {cinnamon-docs}/getting-started/start.html[Lightbend Telemetry Getting started {tab-icon}, window="tab"] page.
```

After that, you will need to add tracing-specific configuration and dependencies.

> The following is the core Cinnamon and Zipkin reporter dependencies that you will need to add to your build tool configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following are the core Cinnamon and Zipkin reporter dependencies that you will need to add to your build tool configuration:
```
